PEP 751: A file format to list Python dependencies for installation reproducibility (#3870)
python/peps: peps/pep-0751.rst

PEP: 751
Title: A file format to list Python dependencies for installation reproducibility

> Author: Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>

Reviewer: Paul as PEP-Delegate?
```suggestion
Author: Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>
PEP-Delegate: Paul Moore <p.f.moore@gmail.com>
```

Author: Paul is BDFL for packaging, so it's implied if he doesn't pick someone. And so far he hasn't been pressed to pick someone, so I think it's premature to specify a delegate.

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 24-Jul-2024
Replaces: 665

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a new file format for specifying what dependencies to
(possibly) install into a Python environment for consistent installation

> repoducibility. The format is designed to be human-readable but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reproducibility. The format is designed to be human-readable but
```

> machine-generated. Installers consuming the file should not need to resolve
> which listed dependencies to install based on other packages listed in the lock
> file, but instead evaluate each dependency in question in isolation.

Reviewer 2: An attempt to avoid the term *lock file* before it is later defined, with the side benefit of phrasing the sentence in the positive mood:
```suggestion
machine-generated. Installers consuming the file should be able to
evaluate each package in question in isolation, with no need for
dependency resolution at install-time.
```

Motivation
==========

Currently, there is no standard way to specify what top-level dependencies one
would like to see installed into a Python environment and then subsequently
record what was eventually installed in a file (called a *lock file*).

> Considering there are four well-known solutions to this problem in the
> community (``pip freeze``, pip-tools_, Poetry_, and PDM_), there seems to be an
> appetite for lock files in general.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps a hedge, but [other](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/projects/#lock-file) [projects](https://pixi.sh/v0.20.0/features/lockfile/) of arguable popularity have formats, and this stops arguments over the cutoff for 'well-known'!
```suggestion
Considering there are at least four well-known solutions to this problem in the
community (``pip freeze``, pip-tools_, Poetry_, and PDM_), there seems to be an
appetite for lock files in general.
```

Those tools also vary in what locking scenarios they support. For instance,
``pip freeze`` and pip-tools only generate lock files for the current
environment while PDM and Poetry try to lock for *any* environment to some
degree. And none of them directly support locking to specific files to install
which can be important for some workflows. There's also concerns around secure

> defaults in the face of supply chain attacks. Finally, not all the formats are

Reviewer 2: This seems a bit vague to me, can we be more specific either about the concerns or what relation they have to lock files? E.g. as a made-up example, "A standardised format would allow for security audit tools to check for secure defaults"

Reviewer 3: It may suffice to say that these tools use various approaches to create an installation record or lock file.

easy to audit to determine what would be installed into an environment ahead of
time.

The lack of a standard also has some drawbacks. For instance, any tooling that
wants to work with lock files must choose which format to support, potentially
leaving users unsupported (e.g. if Dependabot_ chose not to support PDM,
support by cloud providers who can do dependency installations on your behalf,

> etc.).

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how much this paragraph adds, given that it is describing the benefits of standardisation itself.

Author: This was an argument in the last discussion against standardizing, so its (unfortunately) here for a reason.

Reviewer 3: I think you should remove this paragraph. Alternatively, stating a standard will offer users a consistent experience independent of specific tooling.

Reviewer 4: I do think it's worth having an argument why a standard is needed. My first thought on seeing the discussion was "you use tool X to get a tool X lockfile and then use tool X to install from the lockfile, why do you need to standardize that?". This paragraph provides a good set of reasons why standardization is helpful here.

Author: I'm going to keep it.

Rationale
=========

The format is designed so that a *locker* which produces the lock file
and an *installer* which consumes the lock file can be separate tools. This
allows for situations such as cloud hosting providers to use their own installer
that's optimized for their system which is independent of what locker the user
used to create their lock file.

The file format is designed to be human-readable. This is
so that the contents of the file can be audited by a human to make sure no
undesired dependencies end up being included in the lock file. It is also to
facilitate easy understanding of what would be installed if the lock file

> without necessitating running a tool, once again to help with auditing. Finally,
> the format is designed so that viewing a diff of the file is easy by centralizing
> relevant details to minimizing needing to look at other parts of the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
without necessitating running a tool, once again to help with auditing. Finally,
the format is designed so that viewing a diff of the file is easy by centralizing
relevant details.
```

The file format is also designed to not require a resolver at install time.
Being able to analyze dependencies in isolation from one another when listed in
a lock file provides a few benefits. First, it supports auditing by making it
easy to
figure out if a certain dependency would be installed for a certain environment

> by looking at each dependency in isolation instead of having to reference other
> parts of the file contextually. It should also lead to faster installs which are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
without needing to reference other parts of the file contextually.
It should also lead to faster installs which are
```

much more frequent than creating a lock file. Finally, the four tools mentioned

> in the Motivation section either already implement this approach of evaluating

Reviewer 2: to add an internal link:
```suggestion
in the Motivation_ section either already implement this approach of evaluating
```

> dependencies in isolation or have suggested they could in
> `Poetry's case <https://discuss.python.org/t/lock-files-again-but-this-time-w-sdists/46593/83>`__.

Reviewer 2: I think a parenthetical aside would help here
```suggestion
dependencies in isolation or have suggested they could (in
`Poetry's case <https://discuss.python.org/t/lock-files-again-but-this-time-w-sdists/46593/83>`__).
```

Locking Scenarios
-----------------

The lock file format is designed to support two locking scenarios. The format
should also be flexible enough that adding support for other locking scenarios
is possible via a separate PEP.

Per-file Locking
''''''''''''''''

> *Per-file locking* operates under the premise that one wants to install exact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Per-file locking* operates under the premise that one wants to install the exact
```

> *Per-file locking* operates under the premise that one wants to install exact

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*Per-file locking* operates under the premise that one wants to install the exact
```

> *Per-file locking* operates under the premise that one wants to install exact
> same files in any matching environment. As such, the lock file specifies the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Per-file locking* operates under the premise that one wants to install exactly
the same files in any matching environment. As such, the lock file specifies the
```

requirements for an environment and then matches those environment requirements
with the files to install. There can be multiple environments specified in a

> single file, each with their own set of files to install. By specifying the
> exact files to install installers avoid performing a resolution to decide what
> to install.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
single file, each with their own set of files to install. By specifying the
exact files to install, installers avoid performing any resolution to decide what
to install.
```

The motivation for this approach to locking is for those who have controlled
environments that they work with. For instance, if you have specific, controlled
development and production environments then you can use per-file locking to

> make sure the **same** files are installed in either environment for everyone.

Reviewer: Same thing? Clearer like this?
```suggestion
make sure the **same** files are installed in both environments for everyone.
```

This is similar to what ``pip freeze`` and pip-tools_
support, but with more strictness of the exact files as well as incorporating
support to specify the locked files for multiple environments in the same file.

Package Locking
'''''''''''''''

*Package locking* lists the packages and their versions that *may* apply to any
environment being installed for. The list of packages and their versions are
evaluated individually and independently from any other packages and versions
listed in the file. This allows installation to be linear -- read each package
and version and make an isolated decision as to whether it should be installed.

> This avoids requiring the installer to perform a *resolution* (i.e.
> determine what to install based on what else is to be installed).

Reviewer 2: If we need to define what resolving/resolution is, it should be much earlier. 

Also update to match the phrasing in per-file locking, though this does feel repetitive -- is saying that no resolution happens required everywhere it is currently said?
```suggestion
This avoids requiring the installer to perform any resolution to decide what to install.
```

Author: I don't view this as defining "resolution" as much as reiterating what's in the Rationale: the format is designed such that installers do not need to go back and reference other parts of the file to make a decision about installing something.

The motivation of this approach comes from
`PDM lock files <https://frostming.com/en/2024/pdm-lockfile/>`__. By listing the
potential packages and versions that may be installed, what's installed is
controlled in a way that's easy to reason about. This also allows for not
specifying the exact environments that would be supported by the lock file so
there's more flexibility for what environments are compatible with the lock

> file. This approach supports scenarios like open source projects that want to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file. This approach supports scenarios like open-source projects that want to
```

lock what people should use to build the documentation without knowing upfront
what environments their contributors are working from.

As already mentioned, this approach is supported by PDM_. Poetry_ has

> `shown some interest <https://discuss.python.org/t/lock-files-again-but-this-time-w-sdists/46593/83>`__.

Reviewer 2: Just for line-length:
```suggestion
`shown some interest <https://discuss.python.org/t/46593/83>`__.
```

Specification
=============

File Name
---------

A lock file MUST be named ``pylock.toml`` or match the regular expression

> ``f"pylock\.(.+)\.toml"`` if a name is desired or if multiple lock files exist.

Reviewer 4: Not sure why this is an f-string; I'd recommend explicit begin/end markers too.
```suggestion
``^pylock\.(.+)\.toml$`` if a name is desired or if multiple lock files exist.
```

> A lock file MUST be named ``pylock.toml`` or match the regular expression
> ``f"pylock\.(.+)\.toml"`` if a name is desired or if multiple lock files exist.
> The use of the ``.toml`` file extension is to make syntax highlighting in
> editors easier and to reinforce the fact that the file format is meant to be
> human-readable. The prefix and suffix of a named file MUST be lowercase for easy
> detection and stripping off to find the name, e.g.::

Reviewer 2: I think that lock-file names could do with a sentence or two, just saying that lock files can have 'names', what they might be used for, blah -- this paragraph presupposes the idea & dives straight into how to extract the name etc.

```suggestion
A lock file MUST be named :file:`pylock.toml` or match the regular expression
``r"pylock\.(.+)\.toml"`` if a name for the lock file is desired or if multiple lock files exist.
The use of the ``.toml`` file extension is to make syntax highlighting in
editors easier and to reinforce the fact that the file format is meant to be
human-readable. The prefix and suffix of a named file MUST be lowercase for easy
detection and stripping off to find the name, e.g.::
```

  if filename.startswith("pylock.") and filename.endswith(".toml"):
      name = filename.removeprefix("pylock.").removesuffix(".toml")

This PEP has no opinion as to the location of lock files (i.e. in the root or
the subdirectory of a project).

File Format
-----------

The format of the file is TOML_.

All keys listed below are required unless otherwise noted. If two keys are
mutually exclusive to one another, then one of the keys is required while the
other is disallowed.

``version``
'''''''''''

- String
- The version of the lock file format
- This PEP specifies the initial version -- and only valid value until future

>   updates to the standard change it -- as ``"1.0"``

Reviewer 2: None of the bullets in this section have full stops -- is this intentional? It looks a little odd, especially for the longer descriptions (e.g. in wheel tags, or hash algorithms).

Author: You got your periods, but that seemed to mark a bunch of comments as outdated. 😅

Reviewer 2: Oops, an unintended side effect!

``hash-algorithm``
''''''''''''''''''

- String

> - The name of the hash algorithm used for calculating all hash values

Reviewer 4: What sort of names are allowed? If a tool sees a name that it doesn't recognize, what happens?

Author: The ``hashes`` dictionary from https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/simple-repository-api/#project-detail

- Only a single hash algorithm is used for the entire file to allow the
  ``[[package.files]]`` table to be written inline for readability and
  compactness purposes by only listing a single hash value instead of multiple
  values based on multiple hash algorithms
- Specifying a single hash algorithm guarantees that an algorithm that the user
  prefers is used consistently throughout the file without having to audit
  each file hash value separately
- Allows for updating the entire file to a new hash algorithm without running
  the risk of accidentally leaving an old hash value in the file
- Lockers SHOULD specify a hash algorithm that is as least as strong as
  `SHA-256 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-2>`__

``dependencies``
''''''''''''''''

- Array of strings

> - A listing the `dependency specifiers`_ that act as the input to the lock file,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A listing of the `dependency specifiers`_ that act as the input to the lock file,
```

  representing the direct, top-level dependencies to be installed

``[[file-lock]]``
'''''''''''''''''

- Mutually exclusive with ``[package-lock]``
- Array of tables

> - The array's existence infers the use of the per-file locking approach

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The array's existence implies the use of the per-file locking approach
```

  updating the file
- Lockers MUST NOT include
  `compressed tag sets <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/#compressed-tag-sets>`__
  or duplicate tags for consistency across lockers and to simplify checking for
  compatibility

``[package-lock]``
''''''''''''''''''

- Table
- Mutually exclusive with ``[[file-lock]]``
- Signifies the use of the package locking approach

``package-lock.requires-python``
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

- String
- Holds the `version specifiers`_ for Python version compatibility for the
  overall package locking
- Provides at-a-glance information to know if the lock file *may* apply to a
  version of Python instead of having to scan the entire file to compile the
  same information

``[[package]]``
'''''''''''''''

- Array of tables
- The array contains all data on the locked package versions
- Lockers SHOULD record packages in order by ``package.name`` lexicographically
  and ``package.version`` by the sort order for `version specifiers`_
- Lockers SHOULD record keys in the same order as written in this PEP to
  minimmize changes when updating

> - Designed so that relevant details as to why a package is included is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Designed so that relevant details as to why a package is included are
```

``package.name``
''''''''''''''''

- String
- The `normalized name`_ of the package
- Part of what's required to uniquely identify this entry

``package.version``
'''''''''''''''''''

- String
- The version of the package
- Part of what's required to uniquely identify this entry

``package.multiple-entries``
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Boolean
- If package locking via ``[package-lock]``, then the multiple entries for the
  same package MUST be mutually exclusive via ``package.marker`` (this is not
  required for per-file locking as the ``package.*.lock`` entries imply mutual
  exclusivity)
- Aids in auditing by knowing that there are multiple entries for the same
  package that may need to be considered

``package.description``
'''''''''''''''''''''''

- Optional
- String
- The package's ``Summary`` from its `core metadata`_
- Useful to help understand why a package was included in the file based on its
  purpose

``package.simple-repo-package-url``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Optional (although mutually exclusive with
  ``package.files.simple-repo-package-url``)
- String
- Stores the `project detail`_ URL from the `Simple Repository API`_

> - Useful for generating Packaging URLs (aka *PURLs*)

Reviewer: No need for italics. SBOMs below isn't.
```suggestion
- Useful for generating Packaging URLs (aka PURLs)
```

  `software bill of materials`_ (aka SBOMs)

``package.marker``
''''''''''''''''''

- Optional
- String
- The `environment markers`_ expression which specifies whether this package and
  version applies to the environment
- Only applicable via ``[package-lock]`` and the package locking scenario
- The lack of this key means this package and version is required to be
  installed

``package.requires-python``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Optional
- String
- Holds the `version specifiers`_ for Python version compatibility for the
  package and version
- Useful for documenting why this package and version was included in the file
- Also helps document why the version restriction in
  ``package-lock.requires-python`` was chosen
- It should not provide useful information for installers as it would be
  captured by ``package-lock.requires-python`` and isn't relevant when
  ``[[file-lock]]`` is used

``package.dependents``
''''''''''''''''''''''

- Optional
- Array of strings
- A record of the packages that depend on this package and version
- Useful for analyzing why a package happens to be listed in the file
  for auditing purposes

> - This does not provide information which influences installers

Reviewer 4: Should this line also be added to `package.description`?

Author: I don't think so because I simply don't see how `package.description` could be used for influencing installation, just like `Summary` from core metadata doesn't influence anything.

``package.dependencies``
''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Optional
- Array of strings

> - A record the dependencies of the package and version

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A record of the dependencies of the package and version
```

- Useful in analyzing why a package happens to be listed in the file
  for auditing purposes
- This does not provide information which influences the installer as
  ``[[file-lock]]`` specifies the exact files to use and ``[package-lock]``
  applicability is determined by ``package.marker``

``package.direct``
''''''''''''''''''

- Optional
- Boolean

> - Represents whether the installation is via a `direct URL reference`_

Reviewer 4: Defaults to false? This key appears to have three possible values (true, false, absent), so it should be specified what each one means.

Reviewer 3: Or make it required.

Author: I purposefully didn't require it as I suspect for the vast majority of people it won't be `true`, so it just ends up being noise. I clarified it defaults to `false`.

``[[package.files]]``
'''''''''''''''''''''

- Must be specified if ``[package.vcs]`` is not
- Array of tables
- Tables can be written inline

> - Represents the files to potentially install for the package and version

Reviewer 4: Should we specify a recommended order for the entries?

Author: Yes. Added a note under `package.file.name`.

``package.files.name``
''''''''''''''''''''''

- String
- The file name
- Necessary for installers to decide what to install when using package locking

``package.files.lock``
''''''''''''''''''''''

- Required when ``[[file-lock]]`` is used
- Array of strings
- An array of ``file-lock.name`` values which signify that the file is to be
  installed when the corresponding ``[[file-lock]]`` table applies to the
  environment
- There MUST only be a single file with any one ``file-lock.name`` entry per
  package, regardless of version

``package.files.simple-repo-package-url``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Optional (although mutually exclusive with
  ``package.simple-repo-package-url``)
- String
- The value has the same meaning as ``package.simple-repo-package-url``

> - This key is avaible per-file to support :pep:`708` when some files override

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This key is available per-file to support :pep:`708` when some files override
```

  what's provided by another `Simple Repository API`_ index

``package.files.origin``
''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Optional
- String
- URI where the file was found when the lock file was generated
- Useful for documenting where the file came from and potentially where to look
  for the file if not already downloaded/available

``package.files.hash``
''''''''''''''''''''''

- String
- The hash value of the file contents using the hash algorithm specified by
  ``hash-algorithm``
- Used by installers to verify the file contents match what the locker worked
  with

``[package.vcs]``
'''''''''''''''''

> - Must be specified if ``[[package.files]]`` is not (altough may be specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Must be specified if ``[[package.files]]`` is not (although may be specified
```

  simultaneously with ``[[package.files]]``)
- Table representing the version control system containing the package and
  version

``package.vcs.type``
''''''''''''''''''''

- String
- The type of version control system used
- The valid values are specified by the
  `registered VCSs <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/direct-url-data-structure/#registered-vcs>`__
  of the direct URL data structure

``package.vcs.origin``
''''''''''''''''''''''

- String
- The URI of where the repository was located when the lock file was generated

``package.vcs.commit``
''''''''''''''''''''''

- String
- The commit ID for the repository which represents the package and version
- The value MUST be immutable for the VCS for security purposes
  (e.g. no Git tags)

``package.vcs.lock``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Required when ``[[file-lock]]`` is used

> - An array of strings

Reviewer 4: Recommend that they be sorted in lexicographic order?

Author: There's nothing to sort here; a package can only have one `package.vcs` entry.

- An array of ``file-lock.name`` values which signify that the repository at the
  specified commit is to be installed when the corresponding ``[[file-lock]]``
  table applies to the environment
- A name in the array may only appear if no file listed in
  ``package.files.lock`` contains the name for the same package, regardless of
  version

``package.directory``
'''''''''''''''''''''

- Optional and only valid when ``[package-lock]`` is specified
- String
- A local directory where a source tree for the package and version exists
- Not valid under ``[[file-lock]]`` as this PEP does not make an attempt to
  specify a mechanism for verifying file contents have not changed since locking
  was performed

``[[package.build-requires]]``
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Optional
- An array of tables whose structure matches that of ``[[package]]``

> - Each entry represents a package and version to use when building the

Reviewer 4: Should this itself be a locked array? That is, if I add `a` here, and `a` depends on `b`, will `b` also be installed?

Author: Yes, and I thought that was implied by needing to match `[[package]]`. I'll make it more clear.

  either provide the user with the option to have all files checked (whether
  that is opt-in or out is left up to the tool), or the user is somehow notified
  that such a standards-violating shortcut is being taken (whether this is by
  documentation or at runtime is left to the tool)
- Lockers MAY want to provide a way to let users provide the information
  necessary to install for multiple environments at once when doing per-file
  locking, e.g. supporting a JSON file format which specifies wheel tags and
  marker values much like in ``[[file-lock]]`` for which multiple files can be
  specified, which could then be directly recorded in the corresponding
  ``[[file-lock]]`` table (if it allowed for unambiguous per-file locking
  environment selection)

.. code-block:: JSON

    {
        "marker-values": {"<marker>": "<value>"},
        "wheel-tags": ["<tag>"]
    }

Expectations for Installers
---------------------------

- Installers MAY support installation of non-binary files
  (i.e. source distributions, source trees, and VCS), but are not required to
- Installers MUST provide a way to avoid non-binary file installation for
  reproducibility and security purposes

> - Installers SHOULD make it opt-in for using non-binary file installation to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Installers SHOULD make it opt-in to use non-binary file installation to
```

  facilitate a secure-by-default approach
- Under per-file locking, if what to install is ambiguous then the installer
  MUST raise an error

Installing for per-file locking
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

An example workflow is:

- Iterate through each ``[[file-lock]]`` table to find the one that applies to
  the environment being installed for
- If no compatible environment is found an error MUST be raised
- If multiple environments are found to be compatible then an error MUST be raised
- For the compatible environment, iterate through each entry in ``[[package]]``
- For each ``[[package]]`` entry, iterate through ``[[package.files]]`` to look

> - for any files with ``file-lock.name`` listed in ``package.files.lock``

Reviewer: Should be a continuation, not a new bullet?
```suggestion
  for any files with ``file-lock.name`` listed in ``package.files.lock``
```

> - for any files with ``file-lock.name`` listed in ``package.files.lock``

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  for any files with ``file-lock.name`` listed in ``package.files.lock``
```

- If a file is found with a matching lock name, add it to the list of candidate

>   files to insntall and move on to the next ``[[package]]`` entry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  files to install and move on to the next ``[[package]]`` entry
```

>   files to insntall and move on to the next ``[[package]]`` entry

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  files to install and move on to the next ``[[package]]`` entry
```

- If no file is found then check if ``package.vcs.lock`` contains a match (no
  match is also acceptable)
- If a ``[[package.files]]`` contains multiple matching entries an error MUST
  be raised due to ambiguity for what is to be installed
- If multiple ``[[package]]`` entries for the same package have matching files
  an error MUST be raised due to ambiguity for what is to be installed

> - Find and verify the candidate files and/or CVS entries based on their hash or

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Find and verify the candidate files and/or VCS entries based on their hash or
```

  commit ID as appropriate
- If a source distribution or VCS was selected and
  ``[[package.build-requires]]`` exists, then repeat the above process as
  appropriate to install the build dependencies necessary to build the package
- Install the candidate files

Installing for package locking
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

An example workflow is:

- Verify that the environment is compatible with
  ``package-lock.requires-python``; if it isn't an error MUST be raised
- Iterate through each entry in ``[package]]``
- For each entry, if there's a ``package.marker`` key, evaluate the expression
  - If the expression is false, then move on

>   - Otherwise the package entry must be installed somehow

Reviewer: This needs some adjustment to render properly:
<img width="789" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3ba051c3-d361-4e2e-99f0-74e7cbec0439">

Reviewer 2: Lists in reST need to start and end with a blank line:

```suggestion
- For each entry, if there's a ``package.marker`` key, evaluate the expression

  - If the expression is false, then move on
  - Otherwise the package entry must be installed somehow
```

- Iterate through the files listed in ``[[package.files]]``, looking for the
  "best" file to install
- If no file is found, check for ``[package.vcs]``

> - If not match is found, an error MUST be raised

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If no match is found, an error MUST be raised
```

> - Find and verify the selected files and/or CVS entries based on their hash or

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Find and verify the selected files and/or VCS entries based on their hash or
```

that don't document their lock file format, they could choose to simply start
using the format internally and then transition to saving their lock files with
a name supported by this PEP. For tools with a preexisting, documented format,
they could provide an option to choose which format to emit.

Security Implications
=====================

The hope is that by standardizing on a lock file format that starts from a
security-first posture it will help make overall packaging installation safer.
However, this PEP does not solve all potential security concerns.

One potential concern is tampering with a lock file. If a lock file is not kept
in source control and properly audited, a bad actor could change the file in
nefarious ways (e.g. point to a malware version of a package). Tampering could
also occur in transit to e.g. a cloud provider who will perform an installation
on the user's behalf. Both could be mitigated by signing the lock file either
within the file in a ``[tool]`` entry or via a side channel external to the lock
file itself.

This PEP does not do anything to prevent a user from installing an incorrect

> package. While including many details to help in audting a package's inclusion,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
package. While including many details to help in auditing a package's inclusion,
```

there isn't any mechanism to stop e.g. name confusion attacks via typosquatting.
Lockers may be able to provide some UX to help with this (e.g. by providing
download counts for a package).

How to Teach This
=================

Users should be informed that when they ask to install some package, that
package may have its own dependencies, those dependencies may have dependencies,
and so on. Without writing down what gets installed as part of installing the

> package they requested, things could change from underneatch them (e.g. package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
package they requested, things could change from underneath them (e.g. package
```

versions). Changes to the underlying dependencies can lead to accidental
breakage of their code. Lock files help deal with that by providing a way to
write down what was installed.

> Having what to install written down also helps in collabortaing with others. By

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having what to install written down also helps in collaborating with others. By
```

> agreeing to a lock file's contents, everyone to end up with the same packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
agreeing to a lock file's contents, everyone ends up with the same packages
```

> agreeing to a lock file's contents, everyone to end up with the same packages

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
agreeing to a lock file's contents, everyone ends up with the same packages
```

installed. This helps make sure no one relies on e.g. an API that's only
available in a certain version that not everyone working on the project has
installed.

Lock files also help with security by making sure you always get the same files
installed and not a malicious one that someone may have slipped in. It also
lets one be more deliberate in upgrading their dependencies and thus making sure
the change is on purpose and not one slipped in by a bad actor.

Reference Implementation
========================

A rough proof-of-concept for per-file locking can be found at

> https://github.com/brettcannon/mousebender/tree/pep . An example lock file can
> be seen at
> https://github.com/brettcannon/mousebender/blob/pep/pylock.example.toml .
> 
> For per-package locking, PDM_ indirectly proves the approach works as this PEP
> maintains equivalent data as PDM does for its lock files (whose format was
> inspired by Poetry_). Some of the details of PDM's approach are covered in
> https://frostming.com/en/2024/pdm-lockfile/ and
> https://frostming.com/en/2024/pdm-lock-strategy/ .

Reviewer: Sphinx handles these links fine like this:
```suggestion
https://github.com/brettcannon/mousebender/tree/pep. An example lock file can
be seen at
https://github.com/brettcannon/mousebender/blob/pep/pylock.example.toml.

For per-package locking, PDM_ indirectly proves the approach works as this PEP
maintains equivalent data as PDM does for its lock files (whose format was
inspired by Poetry_). Some of the details of PDM's approach are covered in
https://frostming.com/en/2024/pdm-lockfile/ and
https://frostming.com/en/2024/pdm-lock-strategy/.
```

At one point, to handle the issue of metadata varying between files and thus
require examining every released file for a package and version for accurate
locking results, the idea was floated to introduce a new core metadata version
which would require all metadata for all wheel files be the same for a single
version of a package. Ultimately, though, it was deemed unnecessary as this PEP
will put pressure on people to make files consistent for performance reasons or
to make indexes provide all the metadata separate from the wheel files
themselves. As well, there's no easy enforcement mechanism, and so community
expectation would work as well as a new metadata version.

Have the installer do dependency resolution
-------------------------------------------

In order to support a format more akin to how Poetry worked when this PEP was
drafted, it was suggested that lockers effectively record the packages and their
versions which may be necessary to make an install work in any possible
scenario, and then the installer resolves what to install. But since that
complicates auditing a lock file by requiring much more mental effort to know

> what packages may be installed in any given scenario. Also, one of the Poetry

Reviewer 4: Incomplete sentence. Maybe just remove "since"?

developers
`suggested <https://discuss.python.org/t/lock-files-again-but-this-time-w-sdists/46593/83>`__
that markers as represented in the package locking approach of this PEP may be
sufficient to cover the needs of Poetry. Not having the installer do a
resolution also simplifies their implementation, centralizing complexity in
lockers.

Requiring specific hash algorithm support
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

It was proposed to require a baseline hash algorithm for the files. This was
rejected as no other Python packaging specification requires specific hash
algorithm support. As well, the minimum hash algorithm suggested may eventually

> become an outdated/unsafe suggetion, requiring further updates. In order to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
become an outdated/unsafe suggestion, requiring further updates. In order to
```

promote using the best algorithm at all times, no baseline is provided to avoid
simply defaulting to the baseline in tools without considering the security
ramifications of that hash algorithm.

File naming
-----------

Using ``*.pylock.toml`` as the file name
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

It was proposed to put the ``pylock`` constant part of the file name after the
identifier for the purpose of the lock file. It was decided not to do this so
that lock files would sort together when looking at directory contents instead
of purely based on their purpose which could spread them out in a directory.

Using ``*.pylock`` as the file name
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Not using ``.toml`` as the file extension and instead making it ``.pylock``
itself was proposed. This was decided against so that code editors would know
how to provide syntax highlighting to a lock file without having special
knowledge about the file extension.

Not having a naming convention for the file
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> Having not requirements or guidance for a lock file's name was considered, but

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Having no requirements or guidance for a lock file's name was considered, but
```

As well, if the single hash algorithm used in the lock file wasn't sufficient,
rehashing the files involved as a way to migrate to a different algorithm didn't
seem insurmountable.

Hashing the contents of the lock file itself
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Hashing the contents of the bytes of the file and storing hash value within the
file itself was proposed at some point. This was removed to make it easier
when merging changes to the lock file as each merge would have to recalculate
the hash value to avoid a merge conflict.

Hashing the semantic contents of the file was also proposed, but it would lead
to the same merge conflict issue.

Regardless of which contents were hashed, either approach could have the hash
value stored outside of the file if such a hash was desired.

Recording the creation date of the lock file
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

To know how potentially stale the lock file was, an earlier proposal suggested
recording the creation date of the lock file. But for some same merge conflict
reasons as storing the hash of the file contents, this idea was dropped.

Recording the packaged indexes used

> '''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Recording the package indexes used
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
```

PEP: 751
Title: A file format to list Python dependencies for installation reproducibility
Author: Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 24-Jul-2024
Replaces: 665

========
Abstract
========

> This PEP proposes a new file format for specifying what dependencies to
> (possibly) install into a Python environment for consistent installation
> repoducibility. The format is designed to be human-readable but
> machine-generated. Installers consuming the file should not need to resolve

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This PEP proposes a new file format for dependency specification 
to enable reproducible installation in a Python environment. The format is designed to be human-readable and
machine-generated. Installers consuming the file should not need to resolve
```

which listed dependencies to install based on other packages listed in the lock
file, but instead evaluate each dependency in question in isolation.

==========
Motivation
==========

> Currently, there is no standard way to specify what top-level dependencies one
> would like to see installed into a Python environment and then subsequently
> record what was eventually installed in a file (called a *lock file*).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, no standard exists to:
- specify what top-level dependencies should be installed into a Python environment
- create an immutable record, such as a lock file, of which dependencies were installed
```

what environments their contributors are working from.

As already mentioned, this approach is supported by PDM_. Poetry_ has
`shown some interest <https://discuss.python.org/t/lock-files-again-but-this-time-w-sdists/46593/83>`__.

=============
Specification
=============

---------
File Name
---------

A lock file MUST be named ``pylock.toml`` or match the regular expression
``f"pylock\.(.+)\.toml"`` if a name is desired or if multiple lock files exist.
The use of the ``.toml`` file extension is to make syntax highlighting in
editors easier and to reinforce the fact that the file format is meant to be
human-readable. The prefix and suffix of a named file MUST be lowercase for easy
detection and stripping off to find the name, e.g.::

  if filename.startswith("pylock.") and filename.endswith(".toml"):
      name = filename.removeprefix("pylock.").removesuffix(".toml")

This PEP has no opinion as to the location of lock files (i.e. in the root or
the subdirectory of a project).

-----------
File Format
-----------

The format of the file is TOML_.

All keys listed below are required unless otherwise noted. If two keys are

> mutually exclusive to one another, then one of the keys is required while the

Reviewer 3: Is there a way to know which is the required key and which is disallowed?

Author: It's documented for each key in the PEP where mutual exclusion applies. Are you after something else?
